Enable Brotli compression on GOV.UK (#138)
alphagov/govuk-rfcs: rfc-138-enable-brotli-compression.md

# Enable Brotli compression on GOV.UK

## Summary

Brotli compression is a new compression algorithm that is available in modern browsers that can offer 10-20% better compression over gzip compression. By enabling this option on the CDN users with browsers that support it will receive smaller static files over the wire (HTML, CSS, JavaScript), and those that don't will continue to receive assets that are gzipped.

## Problem

> On GOV.UK we should always be looking to reduce the number of bytes a user has to download to view our pages. This is both good for web performance and data consumption on user devices. Any browser that supports WOFF2 fonts will also support Brotli compression (since this is the compression used in the fonts). According to the latest stats from [caniuse.com](https://caniuse.com/brotli), the Brotli `Accept-Encoding`/`Content-Encoding` functionality is supported by 95% of user browsers globally, and I expect this figure will actually be huger is we only consider UK based users:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On GOV.UK we should always be looking to reduce the number of bytes a user has to download to view our pages. This is both good for web performance and data consumption on user devices. Any browser that supports WOFF2 fonts will also support Brotli compression (since this is the compression used in the fonts). According to the latest stats from [caniuse.com](https://caniuse.com/brotli), the Brotli `Accept-Encoding`/`Content-Encoding` functionality is supported by 95% of user browsers globally, and I expect this figure will actually be bigger if we only consider UK based users:
```

| /                                  | frontend                | 259,371    | 248,653   | -4.13    |
| /coronavirus                       | info-frontend           | 272,687    | 288,650   | -5.53    |
| /browse/driving/driving-licences   | collections             | 278,385    | 265,832   | -4.51    |
| /contact                           | feedback                | 242,047    | 232,124   | -4.10    |
| /search/all                        | finder-frontend         | 313,400    | 295,979   | -5.56    |
| /bank-holidays                     | frontend                | 263,686    | 251,555   | -4.60    |
| /national-minimum-wage-rates       | government-frontend     | 266,699    | 254,073   | -4.73    |
| /info/coronavirus/business-support | info-frontend           | 233,133    | 226,382   | -2.90    |
| /licence-finder/sectors            | licence-finder          | 242,555    | 234,969   | -3.13    |
| /guidance/immigration-rules        | manuals-frontend        | 250,431    | 240,763   | -3.86    |
| /service-manual/service-standard   | service-manual-frontend | 254,529    | 245,881   | -3.40    |

> | /additional-commodity-code         | smart-answers           | 257,766    | 247,293   | -4.06    |

Author: Thanks. I've now run your updated URL through our WPT instance and will update the stats accordingly.

| /government/people/theresa-may     | whitehall               | 277,888    | 265,642   | -4.41    |

These savings for the pages tested converted into the following performance improvements. All tested on a simulated Moto G4 mobile on a 3G connection.

### Homepage

The visual progress of the homepage has improved by approximately 110 ms as can be seen in the visual progress graph:

![Visual progress of the homepage using both compression methods.](rfc-138/visual-progress-homepage.png)

And we see the a reduction in bytes for all the expected assets:

![bytes for assets compared](rfc-138/total-bytes-homepage.png)

### Coronavirus page

> The visual progress graph for this page starts off worse by 300ms, but quickly catches up and the viewport for Brotli completes rendering 200ms before gzip:

Reviewer: Should this be "starts off worse by 400ms"?

Author: Yes! Thanks. Updated.

![visual progress graph for the covid page.](rfc-138/visual-progress-covid.png)

And we see the a reduction in bytes for all the expected assets:

![bytes for assets compared](rfc-138/total-bytes-coronavirus.png)

Showing a 5.53% reduction.

### Bank holidays

The visual progress of the bank holidays has improved by approximately 200ms as can be seen in the visual progress graph:

![Visual progress of the bank holidays using both compression methods.](rfc-138/visual-progress-bank-holidays.png)

And we see the a reduction in bytes for all the expected assets:

![bytes for assets compared](rfc-138/total-bytes-bank-holidays.png)

Showing a 4.60% reduction.

### Search page

> The visual progress of the search page has improved by approximately 300ms initially, 200ms at the end. As can be seen in the visual progress graph:

Reviewer: Should this be 400ms initially?

Author: Yes! Thanks. Updated.

![Visual progress of the bank holidays using both compression methods.](rfc-138/visual-progress-search.png)

And we see the a reduction in bytes for all the expected assets:

![bytes for assets compared](rfc-138/total-bytes-search.png)

Showing a 5.56% reduction.

### Summary 

In all the pages tested across the frontend apps (17 in total) we see between 3-6% reduction in the number of bytes a browser is having to download over the network. This saving is being converted to improvements in the visual metrics a users is seeing in the browser.

## Proposal

> The proposal is to enable Brotli compression at the edge using the [Fastly Brotli Compression LA](https://www.fastly.com/release-notes/q3-2020#brotli). Browsers that support Brotli will receive these versions of the files. Any browsers that don't will receive the gzip version of the file. This can therefore be applied using the progressive enhancement methodology. In doing so we MUST update the configuration VCL so as to automate this process. During testing it was simply enabled via the Fastly user interface.

Reviewer 2: In terms of how we enable this in VCL, have we done any brief investigation in how we might do this?

I found https://developer.fastly.com/reference/vcl/variables/backend-response/beresp-brotli/ but it says "Setting this will unset beresp.gzip." so does that mean we need to parse the `Accept-Encoding` header to set the right `beresp` variable accordingly?

I realise in an RFC we may not want to go too much into the implementation detail, but I just wondered if we'd already looked into it?

Author: Thanks for flagging @thomasleese , I've now raised a support ticket with Fastly asking for more information on how this is enabled on production and what config needs to be changed.

Reviewer 3: In staging and integration, I just click-ops'd it in the Fastly UI.

If we wanted to do that in production, we'd need to [stop our deployment script from unsetting the compression settings](https://github.com/alphagov/govuk-cdn-config/pull/328).

Perhaps it's possible to do the same thing in pure VCL, and not touch the UI.

Alternatively, we could consider using the Fastly terraform provider to manage this, but perhaps that's a wider can of worms.

Author: Update from Fastly support:
> ...enabling it is the toggle and the set `beresp.brotli` in VCL since this has already been enabled for your account

> We SHOULD also purge the static cache once completed is it was found during testing that certain Fastly PoP's continued to serve the uncompressed version of the file since there was a mismatch between `Accept-Encoding` header from the browser and `Content-Encoding` version available on the CDN. Once the cache was purged this issue was rectified. This issue will rectify itself over time anyway even without the manual purging since Rails inserts an MD5 fingerprint into the filename of each file. Once a file is changed it will have a new URL, thus invalidating the old cache.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We SHOULD also purge the static cache once completed as it was found during testing that certain Fastly PoP's continued to serve the uncompressed version of the file since there was a mismatch between `Accept-Encoding` header from the browser and `Content-Encoding` version available on the CDN. Once the cache was purged this issue was rectified. However, this issue would rectify itself over time even without the manual purging, since Rails inserts an MD5 fingerprint into the filename of each file. Once a file is changed it will have a new URL, thus invalidating the old cache.
```
